(R) Hi there! I'm Rachel Coulter (N) & I'm Nathan Coulter!
(R) we are going to give you an overview of scratch,(N) demo some games,(R) and give you inspiration to make your games and stories come to life

(N) Scratch is a graphical programming environment focused on education.
(R) Nathan and I use it to make our own games.

(R) you can do it at scratch.mit.edu or you can download the offline editor though, the offline editor tends to be a little sketchy sometimes.

(N) You drag and drop pieces, called blocks, to create scripts.
(R) When you play the scripts you can see the results on the screen or stage.

(N) this is the screen where you see the game or scene.

Characters or pieces in the game are pictures called sprites each sprite can
have scripts that tell it what to do. here we have a default cat sprite.

A sprite's location is given in X & Y coordinates.
This is called a coordinate plane.
0,0 is in the middle.
When you move up the Y gets bigger.  When you move down the Y gets smaller.
When you move right the X gets bigger.  When you move left the X gets smaller.

this is the scripting tab where most of the magic happens.
There are blocks here that you can drag into your working area
-- drag block into working area --
And those blocks effect our scene.
-- click block and see sprite move --

Now let's talk about the different kinds of blocks.

-- Nathan goes down the left list of blocks and makes a variable --

Motion - how to tell your sprite to move
Looks - change your sprite's appearance
Sound - make your sprite play a sound
Pen - this is for drawing on the scene we have used it minorly but we have no great experience.
Data - this is where you can make variables
-- make a "score" variable & mention new blocks --

Events - The things that activate your blocks
Control - programming logic like repetition
Sensing - how your sprite knows something happened
Operators - used for math or logic conditions.
More Blocks - takes a complex operation and makes it shorter and allow you to reuse it.
              In programing, this is called "extracting a method."

-- define a jump block and show it --
If you attach a jump block to a "repeat 10 times" block & a flag block
When you click the flag, we'll make the cat jump 10 times.

Hey, now we're programmers!

Now you should go get scratch and try it out for yourself!
