-- introduce yourselves --

Scratch is a graphical programming environment focused on education.
Nathan and I use it to make our own games.

You can do it online at scratch.mit.edu, or you can download the offline editor.

You drag and drop pieces, called blocks, to create scripts.

When you play the scripts you can see the results.

This is the screen where you see the game or scene.

Characters or pieces in the game are pictures called sprites. Each sprite can
have scripts that tell it what to do. Here we have a default cat sprite.

A sprite's location is given in X & Y coordinates.
This is called a coordinate plane.
0,0 is in the middle.
When you move up the Y gets bigger.  When you move down the Y gets smaller.
When you move right the X gets bigger.  When you move left the X gets smaller.

The scripting tab is where most of the magic happens.
There are blocks here that you can drag into your working area
-- drag block into working area --
And those blocks effect our scene.
-- click block and see sprite move --

Now let's talk about the different kinds of blocks.

-- Nathan goes down the left list of blocks and makes a variable --

Motion - how to tell your sprite to move
Looks - change your sprite's appearance
Sound - make your sprite play a sound
Pen - this is for drawing on the scene but I haven't used it yet.
Data - this is where you can make variables
-- make a "score" variable & mention new blocks --

Events - The things that activate your blocks
Control - programming logic like repetition
Sensing - how your sprite knows something happened
Operators - used for math or logic conditions.
More Blocks - takes a complex operation and makes it shorter and allow you to reuse it.
              In programing, this is called "extracting a method."

-- define a jump block and show it --

So let's make a simple scene with our jumping cat.

When you click the flag, we'll make the cat jump 10 times.

Hey, now we're programmers!

Now let's talk about costumes.

#change costume
#make the cat walk
#define walk block
#make cat run
#define run block

#make cat walk in a square
#make cat jump at corners
#make cat run in square

if you search in the Looks area you will find the next costume block
and if you click it the cat will change how it looks.

What about we make a new block? We'll call this block walk. But 
we now have to define what "walk" means, so we attach a next costume block. then a move ten steps block to make it move, and wait 1 secs block to make it look good. though one second is to long so  lets shorten it to 0.2 secs and ta-da! we now have a walk block!
#explain degrees
but what about we also make a run block how would we do that?
--take help from the audiunce-- 
Look you guys made a run block! 

And let's make the cat walk in a square and jump at the corners so if we mix those two together and add these blocks
--conbine walk and jump blocks and add a wait 1 secs and a turn left 15 block (ajust wait and turn blocks)--
we'll make him walk in a square and jump at the corners!

and if we replace the walk block with our run block he'll run instead of walking! 

#make it walk right 
#make it walk left
#explain rotation
#move using keys

we are going to make our cat walk left and right using the arrow keys.
to move right we have to make a "walk right" block. to do that we will just rename the "walk" block "walk right".
a fun fact about Scratch is that the "move ten steps" block only moves from left to right. so for the cat to walk left we will have to figure out something else.

first we want it to point which way? that's right! left.

but hold on,  if we make the cat point left he's upside-down! let's figure out how to fix that.
 first, let's talk about rotation. there are three ways you can rotate. you can rotate in a circle, rotate so you flip or mirror, and not rotate at all. so what do you think we should use? circle, flip, or, none? that's right! flip. so now he should flip the right way.to get him to walk left all we have to do is make a new block called "walk left". to define it why don't we duplicate the blocks for "walk right" it should work because it's pointing a new way right?
WHAT HAPPENED?! it went backwards instead of walking left. does anyone know what happened? right! "take ten steps" always goes from left to right!
so to make him walk left we just change it from ten to negative ten and he will walk left. now all we have to do is 

1. make sure that rotation is on flip
2.change a space key block to left arrow 
3.attach a point in direction -90 degrees block
4.attach a "walk left" block
and if we test it, it should work.

